# Lecture 1 #

## Grading ##

5 assignments, will be handed out every week, due the next week.

## All lecture notes ##

  * [Class 1](http://hjemmesider.diku.dk/~glueck/todai/00RC.pdf)
  * [Class 2](http://hjemmesider.diku.dk/~glueck/todai/01RC.pdf)
  * [Class 3](http://hjemmesider.diku.dk/~glueck/todai/02RC.pdf)

## Notes ##

[Lecture notes.](http://hjemmesider.diku.dk/~glueck/todai/00RC.pdf)

All computation is a physical process, and is governed by the laws of physics.

  * Pen and paper
  * Biological system
  * Laptop

There is a physical cost (entropy, energy) of information destruction. Since a
physical state can't be destroyed, a "destroyed" bit must be turned into
something else.

To run a computation on a quantum computer, you must turn it into a reversible
program. Learning about reversible logic gates means you will be able to
understand (to some extent) how the logic gate diagrams work, because the
diagrams are the same.

A reversible computation is deterministic both in the forward and backward
direction.

All logic gates are lossy: `AND`, `OR` and `XOR` gates have 4 possible inputs,
and 2 possible outputs.

The equivalent of the `NAND` gate in reversible computation is the
"Controlled-Controlled Not Gate" or the "Toffoli Gate": From it you can build
any reversible computation state.

### Computability ###

For conventional (= irreversible) languages, the gold standard is Turing-completeness. They can compute **all** computable functions.

Reversible languages are **r-Turing-complete**. These can compute only **all
injective** functions. This makes them strictly less powerful than Turing-machines

Two main steps:

1. First, you must injectivize the function. For examlpe, for fibonaccis
   suequnece don't compute just `fib(n)`, but also the next number, `(fib(n),
   fib(n+1))`. This is because `fib(1) = fib(2) = 1`. Thus, it takes some
   ingenuety to injectiveze a function.
2. Implementation. This is done in a reversible programming language. (*Janus*
   is the one we learn for now.)
   
### Inverse Fibonacci ###

```
n x1 x2 // Create global integer variables, initially 0.

procedure main_fwd
  n += 4
  call fib

procedure main_fwd
  x1 += 5
  x2 += 8
  uncall fib

procedure fib
  if n=0 then x1 += 1
              x2 += 1
         else n -= 1
              call fib
              x1 += x2
              x1 <=> x2 // swap variable values
  fi x1=x2
```

How do we inverse this procedure in a mechanical way?

1. `if`-case is flipped, exit condition and in-condition is the same.
2. swap all statements in every body (`if`, `loop`, the entire program body.)
3. all `call f` become `uncall f` or `call f^-1`.
4. additions become multiplications, and multiplications become additions.

```
procedure fib-1
  if x1=x2 then x1 -= 1
                x2 -= 1
           else x1 <=> x2 // swap variable values
                x1 -= x2
                call fib-1
                n += 1

  fi x1=x2
```

A cool thing is that as we invert a program, no lines of code are added: we can
do any number of inversions, and our program will always be the same length.

## Any program can be reversed ##

First of all, McCarthy's ['56] gave an algorithm that can be an inverse
interpreter for any program. It is unholy inefficient, and there is no way for
a general program to know if all inputs have been found.

McCarthy guarantees that there exists an inverse interpreter for any program. From this, we can build everything we could possibly want (however, very inefficient implementations).

**Given an inverse interpreter `invint` and a program `prog`, define the inverse of said program**
``` haskell
inverseProg = \out -> (invint prog) out
```
**Given inverse intepreter `invint`, construct a program inverter.**
```hasekll
inverter = \prog -> \out -> (invint prog) out
```
**Given program inverter `inverter`, construct an inverse intepreter.**
```hasekll
inverseInterpreter = \(prog, out) -> (inverter p) out
```

#### Q: Can we, in theory, do reversible computation with no energy loss? ####

Yes. Irreversible computation must consume energy, always. But reversible
computation can, in theory, in an ideal physical environment, be done with not
energy. It's like an elevator: it is just a system with two weights, which could
in theory be operated with 0 energy consumption. Of course, in practice, some
energy will always be consumed.

#### Q: Can reversible computation be implemented in only software? ####

Yes, and it might be interesting.

#### Q: Can we map from an irreversible computation to a reversible one? How? Proof that it is impossible? ####

Yes, with McCarthy's method. However, this can't necessarily be done efficiently
with this method. Is there anything else we can do?


Assignment 1
============

1 and 2 are defined in Haskell.

**1. Given inverse intepreter `invint`, construct a program inverter.**
```haskell
invint :: (Program, Output) -> Input
inverter = \prog -> \out -> invint (prog, out)
```
**2. Given program inverter `inverter`, construct an inverse intepreter.**
```haskell
inverter :: Program -> Output -> Input
invint = \(prog, out) -> (inverter p) out
```

**Note on task 1 and 2:**

If we uncurry the `invint` function, so that `invint` doesn't take a tuple as
input, but rather (equvalently) takes a program and returns a function that
takes an output and returns the input, then `invint = inverter`.

```haskell
invint :: Program -> Output -> Input
inverter prog = invint prog
-- ... or equivalently:
inverter = invint

invint prog out = (inverter prog) out
-- ... or equivalently:
invint = inverter
```


**3. Run the program `fib` forward (`CALL main_fwd`) by hand. Trace the store `(n, x1, x2)` after each statement.**

```
(0, 0, 0) -- n x1 x2

(4, 0, 0) -- n += 4
(4, 0, 0) -- if n=0
(3, 0, 0) -- else n -= 1
(3, 0, 0) -- if n=0
(2, 0, 0) -- else n -= 1
(2, 0, 0) -- if n=0
(1, 0, 0) -- else n -= 1
(1, 0, 0) -- if n=0
(0, 0, 0) -- else n -= 1
(0, 0, 0) -- if n=0
(0, 1, 0) -- x2 += 1
(0, 1, 1) -- x2 += 1
# Recurse up 4 levels.
(0, 2, 1) -- x1 += x2
(0, 1, 2) -- x1 <=> x2
(0, 3, 2) -- x1 += x2
(0, 2, 3) -- x1 <=> x2
(0, 5, 3) -- x1 += x2
(0, 3, 5) -- x1 <=> x2
(0, 8, 5) -- x1 += x2
(0, 5, 8) -- x1 <=> x2
# Done
```

**4. Run the program `fib` backward (`CALL main_bwd`) by hand. Trace the store `(n, x1, x2)` after each statement.**

```
(0, 0, 0) -- n x1 x2

(0, 5, 8) -- fi x1=x2
(0, 8, 5) -- x1 <=> x2
(0, 3, 5) -- x1 += x2
# uncall fib
(0, 5, 3) -- x1 <=> x2
(0, 2, 3) -- x1 += x2
# uncall fib
(0, 3, 2) -- x1 <=> x2
(0, 1, 2) -- x1 += x2
# uncall fib
(0, 2, 1) -- x1 <=> x2
(0, 1, 1) -- x1 += x2
# uncall fib
(0, 1, 1) -- fi x1=x2
(0, 1, 0) -- x2 += 1
(0, 0, 0) -- x2 += 1
# Recurse up 4 levels.
(1, 0, 0) -- else n -= 1
(2, 0, 0) -- else n -= 1
(3, 0, 0) -- else n -= 1
(4, 0, 0) -- else n -= 1
 ```

** 5. Describe informally how you interpreted each statement `+=`, `-=`, `<=>`, `if`, `call` in Janus in both directions.**

|    | forward  | backward |
|----|----------|----------|
|+=  | add      | subtract |
|-=  | subtract | add      |
|<=> | swap     | swap     |
|if  | check if | check fi |
|call| call     | uncall   |

* `+=`, `-=`: simple addidion and subtraction. They are each other's inverses,
  so their roles are swapped depending on direction.
* `<=>`: behaves identically in both directions, since a swap is its own inverse.
* `if`: going forward, we check the `if` condition, and branch to the
  `then`-branch if `true` and `else`-branch if `false`. Going backwards, `fi` is
  checked, and branching happens in the same way (but the block is read in reverse.)
* `call`: calls a function by moving the function pointer to that procedure, and
  pushing the current position to a return stack (so that the recursion can
  return). In the backwards direction, the function is `uncall`ed in the same manner.
  
  
